linux-administration/step03.md, before:

# Resources usage on the system

In this chapter we will be looking at most common issues when it comes down to the usage of resources on the system.

Things such as High CPU load, High RAM usage, low Disk space left on the system.

## The **htop** command

**htop** and **top** are some of the most common commands when it comes to looking into how many resources the proccesses on the system are using.

`htop`{{execute}} will open a interactive program which gives us information about running programs, CPU and Memory usage, the PID, the time since it started etc.

You can press `F6` to sort by other fields like CPU, Memory etc. 

By default it will show us the highest consuming programs on the system at the top.

You can press `F10` or `q` after you noticed that a program is using too much memory or CPU.

Any kind of high activity might either be related to a high usage of the application, in which case it should be disscussed with the team to increase resources and scale up the application, add more servers.

Or in case of a new release, there might be some kind of leakage of resources and the development teams should be notified that the applications are using way too many resources.

## The **uptime** or **w** command

You can use `uptime`{{execute}} or `w`{{uptime}} to get a **load average** of the CPU being used on the system.

The 3 numbers shown in the **load average** section, represent how much **CPU** has been used of the total number of cores on the system, in the last 1, 5 and 15 minutes.

For example if we run: `nproc`{{execute}} we will get a number which represents the number of CPU cores which the system has.

If the numbers shown in the **load average** are higher than the number shown by `nproc`, it means that the applications on the system require more resources than what it has.

If the number of **load average** is constant, users will experience slowness because the applications don't have enough CPU resources to serve web pages to the users.

In either cases, if the **load average** is too high, we should either scale up the resources of the server or discuss with the development teams if that is expected.

## The **free** command

`free` will give us information about the memory usage on the system.

Running `free -h`{{execute}} will give us RAM usage in a human readable format/GB size.

It is usually useful to run as a first command when checking if there is a low memory usage on the system.

## Using the **ps** command

We can also use the **ps** command to easily get the programs which use the most CPU and memory.

We can run `ps` like so: `ps -eo pid,ppid,cmd,%mem,%cpu --sort=-%mem`{{execute}}

This will give us all the proccesses on the system, and only show the Memory and CPU usage used by the programs.

## Using the **df** and **du** commands

When it comes down to checking disk usage on the system, `df` and `du` are the most common commands used.

`df` is used to check disk usage per filesystem/disk.
`du` is used to check disk usage per folders or files.

For example if we want to check the disk usage on the whole sytem we can run: `df -h`{{execute}}

This is most commonly used when someone complains that for example a file upload does not work, data is not getting generated etc.

Mainly anything which takes up storage, our first instinct should be that the disk usage is close to full, which can be an issue.

Usually if we notice that the disk usage is high, the next step is to look up for the folders which take up the most space on the system.

In order to do that, we can use the `du` command.

For example if we want to check what are the biggest 5 folders in the `/var` folder, we can run: `sudo du -Sh /var/ | sort -rh | head -5`{{execute}}

And to check the 5 biggest files in the `/var` folders, we can run the `find` command like so: `find /var -type f -exec du -Sh {} + | sort -rh | head -n 5`{{execute}}

Usually after checking that the disk usage is full, we would start checking folders and files which take up space and identify the issue. Most of the times it can be a big file, like a log file growing big because there are many requests, or some backup files not being deleted properly.e

## Conclusion

We now have the tools necessary to identify issues related to the usage of resources on our system.

Most of the times we will simply start checking all the resources one by one when we encounter issues with our applications.

From there on out, you can present the findings on to the development teams and decide on next steps.

Commit message:

Add more info on CPu

linux-administration/step03.md, after:

# Resources usage on the system

In this chapter we will be looking at most common issues when it comes down to the usage of resources on the system.

Things such as High CPU load, High RAM usage, low Disk space left on the system.

## The **htop** command

**htop** and **top** are some of the most common commands when it comes to looking into how many resources the proccesses on the system are using.

`htop`{{execute}} will open a interactive program which gives us information about running programs, CPU and Memory usage, the PID, the time since it started etc.

You can press `F6` to sort by other fields like CPU, Memory etc. 

By default it will show us the highest consuming programs on the system at the top.

You can press `F10` or `q` after you noticed that a program is using too much memory or CPU.

Any kind of high activity might either be related to a high usage of the application, in which case it should be disscussed with the team to increase resources and scale up the application, add more servers.

Or in case of a new release, there might be some kind of leakage of resources and the development teams should be notified that the applications are using way too many resources.

## The **uptime** or **w** command

You can use `uptime`{{execute}} or `w`{{uptime}} to get a **load average** of the CPU being used on the system.

The 3 numbers shown in the **load average** section, represent how much **CPU** has been used of the total number of cores on the system, in the last 1, 5 and 15 minutes.

For example if we run: `nproc`{{execute}} we will get a number which represents the number of CPU cores which the system has.

If the numbers shown in the **load average** are higher than the number shown by `nproc`, it means that the applications on the system require more resources than what it has.

If the number of **load average** is constant, users will experience slowness because the applications don't have enough CPU resources to serve web pages to the users.

For example if the load average is **100** it means that there are currently **100** proccesses waiting after the CPU to be able to execute them, generating slow time for the processes which are waiting for more CPU.

In either cases, if the **load average** is too high, we should either scale up the resources of the server or discuss with the development teams if that is expected.

## The **free** command

`free` will give us information about the memory usage on the system.

Running `free -h`{{execute}} will give us RAM usage in a human readable format/GB size.

It is usually useful to run as a first command when checking if there is a low memory usage on the system.

## Using the **ps** command

We can also use the **ps** command to easily get the programs which use the most CPU and memory.

We can run `ps` like so: `ps -eo pid,ppid,cmd,%mem,%cpu --sort=-%mem`{{execute}}

This will give us all the proccesses on the system, and only show the Memory and CPU usage used by the programs.

## Using the **df** and **du** commands

When it comes down to checking disk usage on the system, `df` and `du` are the most common commands used.

`df` is used to check disk usage per filesystem/disk.
`du` is used to check disk usage per folders or files.

For example if we want to check the disk usage on the whole sytem we can run: `df -h`{{execute}}

This is most commonly used when someone complains that for example a file upload does not work, data is not getting generated etc.

Mainly anything which takes up storage, our first instinct should be that the disk usage is close to full, which can be an issue.

Usually if we notice that the disk usage is high, the next step is to look up for the folders which take up the most space on the system.

In order to do that, we can use the `du` command.

For example if we want to check what are the biggest 5 folders in the `/var` folder, we can run: `sudo du -Sh /var/ | sort -rh | head -5`{{execute}}

And to check the 5 biggest files in the `/var` folders, we can run the `find` command like so: `find /var -type f -exec du -Sh {} + | sort -rh | head -n 5`{{execute}}

Usually after checking that the disk usage is full, we would start checking folders and files which take up space and identify the issue. Most of the times it can be a big file, like a log file growing big because there are many requests, or some backup files not being deleted properly.e

## Conclusion

We now have the tools necessary to identify issues related to the usage of resources on our system.

Most of the times we will simply start checking all the resources one by one when we encounter issues with our applications.

From there on out, you can present the findings on to the development teams and decide on next steps.
